**How does** the court **intimidate the witnesses in** giving **testimony for** cases of **capital law? They would bring** the witnesses **in and intimidate them** by saying to them: **Perhaps** what **you say** in your testimony is **based on conjecture, or** perhaps it is **based on a rumor,** perhaps it is **testimony** based on **hearsay,** e.g., you heard a witness testify to this in a different court, **or** perhaps it is **based on the statement of a trusted person. Perhaps you do not know that ultimately we examine you with inquiry and interrogation,** and if you are lying, your lie will be discovered. The court tells them: **You should know that** cases of **capital law** are **not like** cases of **monetary law.** In cases of **monetary law, a person** who testifies falsely, causing money to be given to the wrong party, can **give** the **money** to the proper owner **and his** sin **is atoned** for. In cases of **capital law,** if one testifies falsely, **the blood of** the accused **and the blood of his offspring** that he did not merit to produce **are ascribed to** the witness’s testimony **until eternity.** The proof for this is **as we found with Cain, who killed his brother, as it is stated** concerning him: “The voice of **your brother’s blood [_demei_] cries** out to Me from the ground” (Genesis 4:10). The verse **does not state: Your brother’s blood [_dam_],** in the singular, **but** rather: **“Your brother’s blood [_demei_],”** in the plural. This serves to teach that the loss of both **his** brother’s **blood and the blood of his** brother’s **offspring** are ascribed to Cain. The mishna notes: **Alternatively,** the phrase **“your brother’s blood [_demei_],”** written in the plural, teaches that **that his blood** was not gathered in one place but was **splattered on the trees and on the stones.** The court tells the witnesses: **Therefore, Adam** the first man **was created alone, to teach you that** with regard to **anyone who destroys one soul from the Jewish people,** i.e., kills one Jew, **the verse ascribes him** blame **as if he destroyed an entire world,** as Adam was one person, from whom the population of an entire world came forth. **And** conversely, **anyone who sustains one soul from the Jewish people, the verse ascribes him** credit **as if he sustained an entire world.** The mishna cites another reason Adam the first man was created alone: **And** this was done **due to** the importance of maintaining **peace among people, so** that one **person will not say to another: My father,** i.e., progenitor, **is greater than your father. And** it was also **so that the heretics** who believe in multiple gods **will not say: There are many authorities in Heaven,** and each created a different person. **And** this serves **to tell of the greatness of the Holy One, Blessed be He, as** when **a person stamps several coins with one seal, they are all similar to each other. But the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, Blessed be He, stamped all people with the seal of Adam the first** man, as all of them are his offspring, **and not one of them is similar to another. Therefore,** since all humanity descends from one person, **each and every person is obligated to say: The world was created for me,** as one person can be the source of all humanity, and recognize the significance of his actions. The court says to the witnesses: **And perhaps you will say:** **Why would we** want **this trouble?** Perhaps it would be better not to testify at all. **But** be aware, as **is it not already stated: “And he being a witness, whether he has seen or known, if he does not utter it,** then he shall bear his iniquity” (Leviticus 5:1)? It is a transgression not to testify when one can do so. **And perhaps you will say: Why would we** want **to be responsible for the blood of this** person? **But** be aware, as **is it not already stated: “When the wicked perish, there is song”** (Proverbs 11:10)?